I group some articles here that I'd recommend you to read. Not all of it is important, but the main idea for you would be to get to see a little of the two sides of the story: Periodic and closed BC.

While doing the literature review, try to keep some basic notes. It would also be useful if you created a plot of the parameter space for bounded and closed runs with the simulations presented in the papers.

On the periodic side I propose three papers:

1) Rhines, 1975:
The original paper on the beta-plane turbulence. Don't get lost in the mathematical details, I just think you should read over it once to get an idea of what Rhines had in mind when he proposed the idea of the jets. I think in the paper there is a strong notion of an "unability of the waves to transfer energy".

2) Vallis, 1993:
Vallis was the first to come up with the "dumbbell shape". It is essentially the idea of Rhines, but better quantified: he introduces an important non-dimensional number, Z, the zonostrophy. (You can skip the parts about topographic interaction and seamounts)

3) Scott and Dritschel, 2012:
Somewhat of the state of the art of periodic jet simulations. They present an argument (not based on spectral theories) leading to the formation of zonal jets at large Z, being based on PV homogenisation in physical space. 

I also propose three papers for closed boundary conditions (but perhaps you should first read the section in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (Pedlosky, 1975) about basin modes):

1) Lacasce, 2002: 
I think Lacasce was the first to quantitatively notice that closed boundaries really change things. Note the change of tools (spectra -> structure functions/auto-correlation). 

2) Nadiga, 2006:
Nadiga doesn't agree with Lacasce, he says it's all the same. Try to be a little critical when reading this paper.

3) Nadiga and Straub, 2010:
Here they look at a superposition of small-scale (stochastic) and large-scale forcing, and find jets in both cases. How are the spectral diagnostics they present different from the Vallis 1973 paper?

After these three barotropic studies the community seemed to have switched to baroclinic models to explain the formation of jets, but we won't dive into those works at this point. Instead, I will point you to another study where basin flows play an important role:

bonus) Fox-Kemper, 2004:

A rather technical paper about the behaviour of the barotropic (large-scale) wind-driven ocean circulation. Connects with a lot of previous work that perhaps you don't know, so don't hesitate to note down questions and ask. The important section is 5) Temporal structure. He uses Empirical Orthogonal Functions (EOFs, they can be seen as the most dominant components of a signal) to show the presence of basin modes in his simulations, and is able to predict the mean flow driven by these basin modes in section 6) Basin interior balances and counter-rotating gyres. There is a lengthy calculation in this paper when he calculates the "counter-rotating gyres" (or jets). Try not to get lost in the details, just focus on what he starts with and what comes out of it in the end. For now I don't want you to be able to perform this calculation, just to be aware that it is possible to do it. 


